===============
Upgrading to R2
===============


Current Qubes R2 Beta 3 (R2B3) systems can be upgraded in-place to the
latest R2 (R2) release by following the procedure below.

**Before attempting either an in-place upgrade or a clean installation, we strongly recommend that users back up the system by using the built-in** :doc:`backup tool </user/how-to-guides/how-to-back-up-restore-and-migrate>` **.**

Upgrade Template and Standalone VM(s)
-------------------------------------


- Qubes R2 comes with new template based on Fedora 20. You can upgrade
  existing template according to procedure described
  :ref:`here <user/templates/fedora/fedora:upgrading>`.

- **It also possible to download a new Fedora 20-based template from our repositories**. To do this please first upgrade the Dom0 distro
  as described in the section below.



While technically it is possible to use old Fedora 18 template on R2, it
is strongly recommended to upgrade all the templates and Standalone VMs,
because Fedora 18 no longer receive security updates.

By default, in Qubes R2, there is only one template, however users are
free to create more templates for special purposes, as well as
Standalone VMs. If more than one template and/or Standalone VMs are
used, then it is recommended to upgrade/replace all of them. More
information on using multiple templates, as well as Standalone VMs, can
be found :doc:`here </user/how-to-guides/how-to-install-software>`.

Upgrading dom0
--------------


Note that dom0 in R2 is based on Fedora 20, in contrast to Fedora 18 in
previous release, so this operation will upgrade a lot of packages.

1. Open terminal in Dom0. E.g. Start->System Settings->Konsole.

2. Install all the updates for Dom0:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo qubes-dom0-update





After this step you should have ``qubes-release-2-5`` in your Dom0.
Important: if you happen to have ``qubes-release-2-6*`` then you should
downgrade to ``qubes-release-2-5``! The ``qubes-release-2-6*`` packages
have been uploaded to the testing repos and were kept there for a few
hours, until we realized they bring incorrect repo definitions and so we
removed them and also have changed the update procedure a bit
(simplifying it).

1. Upgrade dom0 to R2:



Note: be sure that the VM used as a update-downloading-vm (by default
its the firewallvm based on the default template) has been updated to
the latest Qubes packages, specifically ``qubes-core-vm-2.1.33`` or
later. This doesn’t imply that the VM must already be upgraded to fc20 –
for Dom0 upgrade we could still use an fc18-based VM (updatevm) it is
only important to install the latest Qubes packages there.

.. code:: bash

      sudo qubes-dom0-update qubes-dom0-dist-upgrade
      sudo qubes-dom0-update



1. If above step completed successfully you should have
   ``qubes-release-2-9`` or later. If not, repeat above step with
   additional ``--clean`` option.



4a. If you chose not to upgrade your fc18 templates, but instead to
download our new fc20-based template you should now be able to do that
by simply typing:

.. code:: bash

      sudo qubes-dom0-update qubes-template-fedora-20-x64



1. Reboot the system.



Please note that if you use Anti Evil Maid, then it won’t be able to
unseal the passphrase this time, because the Xen, kernel, and initramfs
binaries have changed. Once the system boots up again, you could reseal
your Anti Evil Maid’s passphrase to the new configuration. Please
consult Anti Evil Maid documentation for explanation on how to do that.
