=================
Upgrading to R2B3
=================


Current Qubes R2 Beta 2 (R2B2) systems can be upgraded in-place to the
latest R2 Beta 3 (R2B3) release by following the procedure below.
However, upgrading in-place is riskier than performing a clean
installation, since there are more things which can go wrong. For this
reason, **we strongly recommended that users perform a** :doc:`clean installation </user/downloading-installing-upgrading/installation-guide>` **of Qubes R2 Beta 3**.

**Before attempting either an in-place upgrade or a clean installation, we strongly recommend that users back up the system by using the built-in** :doc:`backup tool </user/how-to-guides/how-to-back-up-restore-and-migrate>` **.**

Experienced users may be comfortable accepting the risks of upgrading
in-place. Such users may wish to first attempt an in-place upgrade. If
nothing goes wrong, then some time and effort will have been saved. If
something does go wrong, then the user can simply perform a clean
installation, and no significant loss will have occurred (as long as the
user :doc:`backed up </user/how-to-guides/how-to-back-up-restore-and-migrate>` correctly!).

Upgrade all Template and Standalone VM(s)
-----------------------------------------


By default, in Qubes R2, there is only one template, however users are
free to create more templates for special purposes, as well as
Standalone VMs. More information on using multiple templates, as well as
Standalone VMs, can be found :doc:`here </user/how-to-guides/how-to-install-software>`. The
steps described in this section should be repeated in *all* user’s
Template and Standalone VMs.

It is critical to complete this step **before** proceeding to dom0
upgrade. Otherwise you will most likely ends with unusable system.

1. Open terminal in the template (or standalone VM). E.g. use the Qubes
   Manager’s right-click menu and choose Run Command in VM and type
   ``gnome-terminal`` there.

2. Proceed with normal update in the template:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo yum update



3. Ensure that you’ve got qubes-core-vm package version 2.1.13-3.fc18:

   .. code:: bash

         rpm -q qubes-core-vm



4. Update the system to R2 beta3 packages:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo yum --enablerepo=qubes-vm-r2b3-current update



5. **Do not** shutdown the VM.



Upgrading dom0
--------------


Be sure to do steps described in this section after *all* your template
and standalone VMs got updated as described in the section above. Also
make sure you haven’t shutdown any of: netvm, firewallvm, fedora-18-x64
(or to be more precise: template which your netvm and firewallvm is
based on).

1. Open terminal in Dom0. E.g. Start->System Settings->Konsole.

2. Upgrade the ``qubes-release`` package to the latest version which
   brings in new repo definitions and R2 signing keys:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo qubes-dom0-update qubes-release


   This should install ``qubes-release-2-3.1`` in your Dom0.

3. Upgrade dom0 to R2 beta3:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo qubes-dom0-update --enablerepo=qubes-dom0-r2b3-current



4. If above step completed successfully you should have qubes-core-dom0
   at least 2.1.34. If not, repeat above step with additional
   ``--clean`` option.

5. Now is the time to shutdown all the VMs:

   .. code:: bash

         qvm-shutdown --all --wait



6. Reboot the system.



Please note that if you use Anti Evil Maid, then it won’t be able to
unseal the passphrase this time, because the Xen, kernel, and initramfs
binaries have changed. Once the system boots up again, you could reseal
your Anti Evil Maid’s passphrase to the new configuration. Please
consult Anti Evil Maid documentation for explanation on how to do that.
