=================
Upgrading to R3.1
=================


**Before attempting either an in-place upgrade or a clean installation, we strongly recommend that users** :doc:`back up their systems </user/how-to-guides/how-to-back-up-restore-and-migrate>` **.**

Current Qubes R3.0 systems can be upgraded in-place to the latest R3.1
by following the procedure below.

Upgrade all Template and Standalone VM(s)
-----------------------------------------


By default, in Qubes R3.0, there is only one template. However, users
are free to create more templates for special purposes, as well as
standalones. More information on using multiple templates, as well as
standalones, can be found :doc:`here </user/how-to-guides/how-to-install-software>`. The steps
described in this section should be repeated in **all** the user’s
Template and Standalone VMs.

Upgrade Fedora templates:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


1. Open a terminal in the template (or standalone). (E.g., use Qubes VM
   Manager’s right-click menu, choose “Run Command in VM,” and type
   ``gnome-terminal`` there.)

2. Install the ``qubes-upgrade-vm`` package:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo yum install qubes-upgrade-vm



3. Proceed with a normal upgrade in the template:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo yum upgrade



4. Shut down the template.



Upgrade Debian (and Whonix) templates:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^


1. Open a terminal in the template (or standalone). (E.g., use Qubes VM
   Manager’s right-click menu, choose “Run Command in VM,” and type
   ``gnome-terminal`` there.)

2. Update repository definition:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo cp /etc/apt/sources.list.d/qubes-r3.list /etc/apt/sources.list.d/qubes-r3-upgrade.list
         sudo sed -i 's/r3.0/r3.1/' /etc/apt/sources.list.d/qubes-r3-upgrade.list



3. Proceed with a normal update in the template:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo apt-get update
         sudo apt-get dist-upgrade



4. Remove unnecessary now file:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo rm -f /etc/apt/sources.list.d/qubes-r3-upgrade.list



5. Shut down the template.



Upgrading dom0
--------------


**Important:** Do not perform the steps described in this section until
**all** your Template and Standalone VMs have been upgraded as described
in the previous section. Also, do not shut down ``sys-net`` or
``sys-firewall``, since you will not be able to start them again until
after the entire in-place upgrade procedure is complete.

1. Open a terminal in Dom0. (E.g., Start -> System Settings -> Konsole.)

2. Upgrade dom0 to R3.1:

   .. code:: bash

         sudo qubes-dom0-update --releasever=3.1


   At this point, most of the ``qvm-*`` tools will stop working until
   after you reboot the system.

3. If the previous step completed successfully, your ``qubes-core-dom0``
   version should be ``3.1.4`` or higher. If it’s not, repeat the
   previous step with the ``--clean`` option.

4. Reboot dom0.
   The system may hang during the reboot. If that happens, do not panic.
   All the filesystems will have already been unmounted at this stage,
   so you can simply perform a hard reboot (e.g., hold the physical
   power button down until the machine shuts off, wait a moment, then
   press it again to start it back up).



Please note that if you use :doc:`Anti Evil Maid </user/security-in-qubes/anti-evil-maid>`, it
won’t be able to unseal the passphrase the first time the system boots
after performing this in-place upgrade procedure since the Xen, kernel,
and initramfs binaries will have changed. Once the system boots up
again, you can reseal your Anti Evil Maid passphrase to the new
configuration. Please consult the Anti Evil Maid
:doc:`documentation </user/security-in-qubes/anti-evil-maid>` for instructions on how to do
that.

If you use USB VM, you may encounter problem with starting it on updated
Xen version (because of strict default settings). Take a look at :ref:`User FAQ <introduction/faq:i created a usb vm and assigned usb controllers to it. now the usb vm won't boot.>`
for details.

Once you have upgraded dom0, you can install new templates from Qubes
R3.1 repositories, in particular the new default Fedora 23 template:

.. code:: bash

      sudo qubes-dom0-update qubes-template-fedora-23


