==========
Data leaks
==========


The Role of the Firewall
------------------------


:doc:`Firewalling in Qubes </user/security-in-qubes/firewall>` **is not intended to be a leak-prevention mechanism.**

There are several reasons for this, which will be explained below.
However, the main reason is that Qubes cannot prevent an attacker who
has compromised one app qube with restrictive firewall rules from
leaking data via cooperative covert channels through another compromised
app qube with nonrestrictive firewall rules.

For example, suppose you have an ``email`` app qube. You have set the
firewall rules for ``email`` such that it can communicate only with your
email server. Now suppose that an attacker sends you a GPG-encrypted
message which exploits a hypothetical bug in the GnuPG process. There
are now multiple ways the attacker could proceed to leak data (such as
confidential email messages) from ``email``. The most obvious way is by
simply emailing the data to himself. Another possibility is that the
attacker has also compromised another one of your app qubes, such as
your ``netvm``, which is normally assumed to be untrusted and has
unrestricted access to the network. In this case, the attacker might
move data from ``email`` to the ``netvm`` via a covert channel, such as
the CPU cache. Such covert channels have been described and even
implemented in some “lab environments” and might allow for bandwidths of
even a few tens of bits/sec. It is unclear whether such channels could
be implemented in a real world system, where multiple VMs are running at
the same time, each handling tens or hundreds of processes, all using
the same cache memory, but it is worth keeping in mind. Of course, this
would require special malware written specifically to attack Qubes OS,
and perhaps even a specific Qubes OS version and/or configuration.
Nevertheless, it might be possible.

Note that physically air-gapped machines are not necessarily immune to
this problem. Covert channels can potentially take many forms (e.g.,
sneakernet thumb drive, bluetooth, or even microphone and speakers).

For a further discussion of covert channels, see `this thread <https://groups.google.com/d/topic/qubes-users/AqZV65yZLuU/discussion>`__
and `#817 <https://github.com/QubesOS/qubes-issues/issues/817>`__.

Types of Data Leaks
-------------------


In order to understand and attempt to prevent data leaks in Qubes, we
must distinguish among three different types of relevant data leaks:

1. **Intentional leaks.** Malicious software which actively tries to
   leak data out of an app qube, perhaps via cooperative covert channels
   established with other malicious software in another app qube or on
   some server via networking, if networking, even limited, is allowed
   for the app qube.

2. **Intentional sniffing.** Malicious software trying to use side
   channels to, e.g., actively guess some key material used in another
   VM by some non-malicious software there (e.g., non-leak-proof GPG
   accidentally leaking out bits of the private key by generating some
   timing patterns when using this key for some crypto operation). Such
   attacks have been described in the academic literature, but it is
   doubtful that they would succeed in practice in a moderately busy
   general purpose system like Qubes OS where the attacker normally has
   no way to trigger the target crypto operation explicitly and it is
   normally required that the attacker trigger many such operations.

3. **Unintentional leaks.** Non-malicious software which is either buggy
   or doesn’t maintain the privacy of user data, whether by design or
   accident. For example, software which automatically sends error
   reports to a remote server, where these reports contain details about
   the system which the user did not want to share.
   Both Qubes firewall and an empty NetVM (i.e., setting the NetVM of an
   app qube to “none”) can fully protect against leaks of type 3.
   However, neither Qubes firewall nor an empty NetVM are guaranteed to
   protect against leaks of types 1 and 2. There are few effective,
   practical policy measures available to end-users today to stop the
   leaks of type 1. It is likely that the only way to fully protect
   against leaks of type 2 is to either pause or shut down all other VMs
   while performing sensitive operations in the target VM(s) (such as
   key generation).



For further discussion, see `this thread <https://groups.google.com/d/topic/qubes-users/t0cmNfuVduw/discussion>`__.
